Does the Official World Golf Rankings (OGWR) company fairly rank professional golfers? I cultivated valuable insights analyzing this question during my Junior year of college, tasked to employ the data science techniques I had learned in my undergraduate coursework at the University of Pennsylvania. My background in competitive golf was well-suited for ensuring accuracy in the OGWR data, as well as for investigating the underlying fairness (University of Pennsylvania Varsity golf team ‘16-17, Harvard-Westlake School team captain ‘15-16).

To solve the information question, I employed unsupervised learning methods in Python, corresponding to issues of interest to OGWR’s stake-holders. My application of unsupervised learning highlighted traces of bias in the allocation of the ranking points. Critically, I first found and corrected dozens of errors across the decades of poorly schemed data, errors which would have compromised our statistical analyses. I then compared discrete instances of athletic performance to broader trends in the Principal Component space, with biplots categorized by the over twenty tours and decades of seasons. These visualizations corroborated a multitude of discrete examples of bias towards American-based tours, favoring a particular set of others.

Many information-based systems beyond the OGWR also require creative innovations to best capture and address today’s trends. With this knowledge, I more clearly envision my career of scaling data-driven policies and systems as an information scientist, across a wide range of industry and non-profit sectors.
